feat(aws-pcs): add Jupyter-on-compute-node guide with verification procedure (#1172)
aws-samples/awsome-distributed-training: architectures/aws-pcs/docs/JUPYTER.md

  [cluster-user policy](./IAM.md).
- **Multi-user clusters:** your `$HOME` must exist before the first job — log
  in to the login node (SSH or SSM) once so `pam_mkhomedir` creates it. Slurm
  jobs do not create home directories.

## Step 1 — one-time: create a Jupyter environment on `/home`

On the login node (as the user who will run Jupyter). `/home` is shared
FSx for OpenZFS, so every compute node sees the venv:

```bash
python3 -m venv $HOME/jupyter-env
$HOME/jupyter-env/bin/pip install --upgrade pip jupyterlab
```

> For ML work, also set `HF_HOME=/fsx/.hf-cache` in your notebooks/jobs — the
> HuggingFace cache must not live on NFS `/home` (file-locking errors under
> concurrent access).

## Step 2 — submit the Jupyter job

Save as `$HOME/jupyter.sbatch` and submit **from your home directory** with
`sbatch jupyter.sbatch`:

```bash
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH --job-name=jupyter
#SBATCH --partition=cpu1          # or your GPU queue; then add e.g. --gres=gpu:1
#SBATCH --nodes=1
#SBATCH --time=8:00:00            # auto-terminate after 8 h — adjust to taste
#SBATCH --output=%u-jupyter-%j.log

umask 077   # everything this job writes is owner-only

> # Port derived from the job ID → no collisions between concurrent servers

Reviewer: ### `docs/JUPYTER.md`: the job-ID port derivation aliases every 1000 IDs, so "no collisions between concurrent servers" is stronger than it holds

**Observation:** `PORT=$((8000 + SLURM_JOB_ID % 1000))` maps job IDs into `8000–8999`, so IDs congruent mod 1000 (e.g. 1500 and 2500) get the same port. The comment promises "no collisions between concurrent servers."

**Impact:** two servers only actually collide when they land on the **same node** *and* compute the same port (same port on different nodes is harmless — different IPs). But the guide explicitly enables that exact case a few lines down — "on multi-GPU nodes Slurm can schedule other jobs (another user's Jupyter…) onto the remaining GPUs." So on a busy shared node the guarantee can break: the second `jupyter lab` fails to bind. Low probability, but the doc invites the scenario.

**Suggestion:** soften the claim (the arithmetic itself is fine — `%` binds tighter than `+`, range is 8000–8999 as intended):

```suggestion
# Port derived from the job ID (range 8000-8999). Collisions are unlikely but
# possible if two servers share a node with job IDs differing by a multiple of 1000.
```

PORT=$((8000 + SLURM_JOB_ID % 1000))
NODE_IP=$(hostname -I | awk '{print $1}')

# Token kept out of the job log on purpose (the log may be readable by others
# depending on where you submit from); mode-600 file under $HOME instead.
TOKEN_FILE=$HOME/.jupyter-token-$SLURM_JOB_ID
openssl rand -hex 24 > "$TOKEN_FILE"

cat <<EOM
======================================================================
Jupyter starting on $(hostname) ($NODE_IP), port $PORT.

1. From your workstation, forward localhost:8888 to the server:

  LOGIN_ID=\$(aws ec2 describe-instances \\

>     --filters "Name=tag:aws:pcs:compute-node-group-name,Values=login" \\

Reviewer: ### `docs/JUPYTER.md`: the login-node discovery `--filters` tag returns no instances on real PCS clusters, so the connect step stalls

**Observation:** the sbatch heredoc tells the user to find the login instance with `LOGIN_ID=$(aws ec2 describe-instances --filters "Name=tag:aws:pcs:compute-node-group-name,Values=login" …)`. I ran this against live PCS clusters and it returns **nothing**: no running PCS instance carries an `aws:pcs:compute-node-group-name` tag. PCS emits `aws:pcs:cluster-id` and `aws:pcs:compute-node-group-id` (the group *ID*, e.g. `pcs_e6u3zq02ol`), plus `Name` — but not `…-group-name`. Since `aws:`-prefixed tags are AWS-applied only, a cluster can't add it either.

**Impact:** `LOGIN_ID` comes back empty, so the very next `aws ssm start-session --target $LOGIN_ID …` has no target and the connect step — the whole point of the guide — fails. I confirmed the tag is absent on **all five PCS clusters in this account across three regions**, including one whose nodes are named `PCS-login`/`PCS-cpu1` (i.e. it looks `deploy-all`-provisioned), so this isn't a one-off. The same filter is used elsewhere in the aws-pcs reference (README, `IAM.md`, `USER-MANAGEMENT.md`, `setup-directory.sh`), so this is broader than this PR — but the PR adds a fresh copy of it here.

**Suggestion:** key on a tag that PCS actually emits — the `Name` convention (`<cluster>-login`, `PCS-login`) or `aws:pcs:compute-node-group-id`. The line below already carries the `instance-state-name` filter, so only the tag line needs to change:

```suggestion
    --filters "Name=tag:Name,Values=*login" \\
```

Could you double-check what your verified clusters tag the login node with? If your `deploy-all` templates were adding `aws:pcs:compute-node-group-name` themselves it would explain the mismatch — but it isn't present on any live cluster I can see, so a `Name`-based (or `aws:pcs:compute-node-group-id`) filter is the portable choice. *Verified live 2026-07-09.*
